## metadata
last updated: 11-19-2023 by Randy
link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs
transcript source: whspmerge


## content

Charles Bennett  [11:15](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=675)
Yeah, if I just have an infinity, let's say like Boltzmann's idea, which gave rise to the Boltzmann brain, of just an infinite, almost, not even, this is before general relativity, an infinite universe at equilibrium, then you get the Boltzmann brain problem. You get the fact that you can't believe anything that you see, because everything happens somewhere. And I think this problem is somewhat better understood in the more modern cosmologies. But I was looking at very simple cellular automata models in which by making the model infinite, and its dynamics is reversible, you get something that looks like unbounded complexity that goes on forever, but it only goes on forever because the model is infinite, and therefore it can never equilibrate and get boring. I think I've got a picture of it. I'll see if I can find an example of the model like that here. Okay, so this is a reversible cellular automaton, and the time goes horizontally like that. And there's three domains here. It's one dimensional automaton, so this is time history of it. And these differ just by the reversal of black and white. So there's domain boundaries that collide here, producing this complicated thing that just goes on forever, getting more and more complicated. This business up here is an artifact because I was doing it with periodic boundary conditions, and this was the wraparound it was beginning to affect it. But if you do it on an infinite model, a lattice, it gets... So this is the sort of thing where you can't get this in a finite model. If you do it in a finite system with local interactions, you get something that looks more like... Here, I'll just do it at the beginning. Yeah, same model. Yeah, so it gets interesting. And then if you run long enough, it just gets boring. Okay, now I'll stop the screen share. So that's why I think infinity is important, but that's just maybe I haven't been familiar enough with cosmology, but I think the cosmologies... I think, let's see what Andy says, but I think that the cosmologies tend to be infinite now also. Now I have to stop sharing my screen. Where is that? Yeah, screen sharing stopped. There it is, good. Okay, there. Okay, good.

David Deutsch  [15:04](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=904)
Right, yeah. Simultaneously to save time, yes. So if you ask, what is computation? What is computation in the universe? Well, what are computers? Well, what is that all about? If I was answering that question, I would have to have universal and universality right in the first sentence somewhere, because I think that's what it's all about. Computation is physical, you know, I'm sure we can all agree on that, but I think there is still a hint of the mathematician's misconception in Charlie's conception of computation, computers, physics. So I would say that the computation exists, universality exists in a particular property of the physical universe, namely that the physical universe can accommodate machines which are universal in the sense that they can be programmed to mimic any other machine if they run long enough and have enough memory. And for them to run long enough and have enough memory, they have to be maintained, they have to have additional memory added, and so there has to be implicitly, there is a background of knowledge creation. If there is to be a sufficiently powerful computer like Turing machine or something, then in the background, there has to be knowledge creation. Just like, I think I first read this in Charlie's thing, like what would happen if you found a fountain pen on the moon, then it would tell you a massive amount more. *In-line comment: It would tell you that it'd been settled by people from the 19th century.*  Yes, yes, most likely. And it's very, very unlikely that it formed spontaneously. And so the most likely explanation for it would be that there had been a civilization, you could infer a lot about the civilization by, as you say, it's a 19th century type civilization, and you could analyze the ink, and therefore see what kind of squids they had there, and so on. So this, another thing that this illustrates, which you didn't mention, is that there's an intimate connection between emergent, simple emergent properties and simple microscopic quantities. In fact, there are laws about emergent properties, and the laws about evolution and knowledge and so on are among the ones we would use to analyze the origin of this fountain pen. So we would gain a lot of knowledge about microscopic information from some macroscopic information and macroscopic laws. Now, so I haven't mentioned mathematics. And the reason I haven't mentioned mathematics, even though I totally agree that there's a mathematical world that's sort of super infinitely large, and that world contains all possible functions and all possible laws and all possible mathematical objects, the vast majority of which we cannot even describe, the ones we can describe are basically the ones that are computable by these machines, which are universal within our universe. So it's no good trying to explain that via what is going to be likely, what you are going to be likely to see, because what is typical, what is probable, and so on, those are all determined by the laws of physics. There is no mathematical notion of probability that applies to physics, unless we have a law of physics saying so. And in some cases we do, and in some cases we don't. And even when we do, and where we do have a probabilistic theory of something, the anthropic principle alone doesn't contain any information about what the laws of physics are. This is an argument that I got from Dennis Sharma a long time ago, with his reaction to Brandon Carter's famous paper about the anthropic principle. The thing is, if you think of this as, how do we fix what the dimensionless constants are, or just the laws themselves, you could think of the laws themselves as being enumerated like in Solomonov induction, so we have all possible laws and so on. And you ask, given what we see, what is the most likely? That is all inapplicable to fundamental physics, because, at least not via the anthropic principle, because if you think of the set of all, or the class or whatever it is, the set of all universe is consistent with something, like something consistent with the fountain pen on the moon, or consistent with what we see, or whatever you want to say, consistent with the existence of computers, almost all of them are on the, very near the boundary of that set. They are almost all of, because the larger the dimension of the set, the more of it is contained near its boundary. So if the only reason why we're here is that we're anthropically selected, then it's overwhelmingly likely that we're going to die in the next nanosecond, or picosecond, I suppose. It depends where the chaos, how fast the chaos is going to come in on us. And since we haven't, that theory is hereby refuted. So that's not the way to get the answer. I think the way to get an answer is not to try to derive microscopic properties that will then give you the desired emergent properties. It is to think of emergent laws, which among other things will give you microscopic laws as well as microscopic initial conditions like the ones that produced that fountain pen. You see, Charlie, your example has lived with me for decades and has changed me deeply.
---
Charles Bédard  [22:55](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=1375)
For you, David, an example of an emergent law that constrains also the microscopic laws would be 'there exist universal computers.' Okay, would you like maybe to expand a bit more because you've contributed quite significantly to the Church-Turing thesis. I think there was quite a bit of ambiguity of how we should understand the Church-Turing thesis. And now you name the physicality of the universal computer. I right away see a link. Maybe it'd be good to expand a little bit on that, especially for the audience here.

David Deutsch  [23:25](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=1405)
Okay, well, I, this is controversial and I don't think I did. I think it was Turing. So the way the story is usually told is that Turing, Godel, Church and post all kind of came up with the same idea at the same time. All prove the same theorems basically, although they had different points of view and and they didn't. None of them copied from each other. They just sort of then, although some of them knew about each other, but they they kind of converged on a conception. But I think Turing's conception was different. The other three all had the mathematician's misconception. They all thought that they were doing a piece of mathematics or as Roger Penrose would say, meta mathematics, theory of proofs. But Turing the way he solved the Hilbert's decision problem was to think of a physical model of proof, a physical model, and then argue implicitly, explicitly, that again is controversial, that argue that that argument is decisive. That is, he thought he was proving and he almost did prove that no physical object can. So sorry, no physical object can escape being part of the Turing, universal Turing machines repertoire. And the universal Turing machine is an idealized physical machine. It's really got nothing to do with mathematics. And its relationship with the physical relationship with the rest of the universe is what he elucidated. And then he said that that solves the decision problem, because we must regard the decision problem itself as a question about the physical world, including mathematicians and so on. And so that's why he used language like functions that would naturally be regarded as computable. Naturally to, I always took that to mean straightforwardly computable in nature. But when I said that to mathematicians, they howled in rage and said that I'd misunderstood it. Well, if I misunderstood it, that misunderstanding turns out to be the truth. And Turing's writings look exactly like that truth. So I think he knew. He just wasn't used to talking about physics. He was a mathematician, but I think he did not have the mathematician's misconception we're all brought up to have it. We have to free ourselves.
---
Charles Bennett  [26:38](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=1598)
How would you say what is the mathematician's misconception?

David Deutsch  [26:43](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=1603)
Well, it's the idea that, well, okay, for present company, I can put it like this. It's the idea that the integers and the logical operations like and, or, and not are given to us by God. They are the natural things. And if you can make some, build some structure or form some conclusion on top of those, then you have proved it. Whereas the real truth is that the integers and the logic, logical connectives and classical rules of inference and all that, they are all given to us by physics alone. There is no underlying mathematical substrate that we can appeal to. If the laws of physics were different, then we could have laws of physics that didn't mention and, or, and not, or integers or real numbers, or, you know, they could use any mathematical objects anywhere in the mathematical world. But the fact that they don't is a feature of the laws of physics. So the, and with this, with this misconception comes some other misconceptions such as, for example, that simplicity is somehow defined independently of the laws of physics and infinity as well. As I have written, you know, Zeno, Zeno was puzzled by the fact that there's an infinite number of points between here and the other side of the room. And how come that he can go from one point to another, an infinite, how come he can do an infinite number of things in a finite time? Well, the answer is that what is finite or infinite physically, its relationship to mathematical finiteness or infinite is a matter for the laws of physics to determine. And they happen to say that this particular infinite thing in classical physics, the continuum, can be traversed, an infinite number of steps of traversing it can be finitely performed. So what can be finitely performed or not, or and what conversely what can only be infinitely performed, i.e. can't be performed, is mandated by the laws of physics, and not vice versa. So it's physics that tells us the difference between find an infinite, complex and simple. And also probability, which is which is a sort of scam lodged in the in the middle of all these misconceptions. The idea that probability... *In-line question: Is it a meta misconception?* There is simply a misconception that probability is another one of these concepts that we can help ourselves to, and we haven't yet invoked any physics. You know, we would like what we see to have at least 0.83 probability, then we won't worry that it's strange. And that invocation of probability we take to be sort of harmless. We don't see that there's a rich world of physics defining what we mean by that. And in the case of probability, unlike the other things, it doesn't even apply to to most of the universe or the multiverse. It just applies to very special situations. So it's... There's no excuse for it. *In-line question: If I would have been asked, what's the mathematician misconception? In a nutshell, I would have said, it's the idea that proof theory is a branch of mathematics, but proof theory is a branch of physics ultimately. It's been... It's given rise to computer science. Computer science has its roots into what are computers. Computers are physical objects. Now, the story you just gave us, you started speaking of natural numbers and logical connectors. How can I bridge those two pictures of the mathematician misconception?*  Well, they are the same, I think. *In-line comment: Maybe I'm giving a try and then tell me. Because we typically do proofs with typical logical connectors and that will give rise to somehow our computers so that we end up abstracting our computers with those logical connectors and those integers. And that's where you say that taking this as a way to formalize proof is basically physical because I'm already abstracting my physics of the computation.*  Yes. I think that's basically what I said. I mean, I'm not really used to speaking in mathematical language. So I speak of it in terms of laws of physics. Yeah. So I think, probably, Turing never said this, but I'm sure if he was if he was here now, he would agree that proof theory is a branch of physics. 
---
Charles Bennett  [32:39](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=1959)
Okay. I, I have I found myself agreeing with almost everything you said until you started talking about the mathematical, mathematicians misconception, which I don't think Turing would have agreed with you about, and which I think is actually a piece of, how shall I say, a dysphemism. It's an idea that you don't like, but you haven't shown that there's anything false about it. In fact, I think Turing thought more about physics than his contemporaries, but I think he felt that the discovery of universality meant that the physics that we have here could be simulated by a computer. And the physics that might exist in a very different world, perhaps one with a different number of dimensions or one that's not even has a notion of locality could also be simulated by a Turing machine. In other words, I believe he felt, he was very aware of physics, but he didn't think that different parts of the multiverse, think of the string theory, the vast number of different supposed things that can come out of string theory, of which we might be one, that they would have a different mathematics. I think he believed in the universality of mathematics and its ability to simulate physics. So that's where I think that you're even calling it a misconception is a misconception of what Turing thought and also a dysphemism rather than any kind of refutation. However, almost everything you said at the beginning, I agreed with, I said, I take for granted that the universality of computation, the unsolvability of the whole problem, which is the same thing, is the heart of what the notion of computation is. And that the other thing that I also didn't agree with that I also didn't even say, because I believe it so strongly, is that this mathematics, this universal mathematics of computation is capable of simulating physics, not only the physics that we have here, but if you talk to Andreas, if he's still around here, there he is, yes. In many models of cosmology now imagine that there are inaccessible parts of the universe, which are no less real than ours, except that we'll never hear about them, in which the laws of physics, such as the number of spatial dimensions and the number of temporal dimensions, if you want, and are extremely different. And in almost all of them, universal computers don't exist. They exist physically, but they don't exist, there's nobody there to complain about it or to celebrate it, but they're there. They're like the desert areas of the universe. But all of that could be simulated by mathematics. So I don't think there is a mathematician's misconception. There is just the idea which has been around since Galileo, that whatever physics is, is discoverable by experiment and modelable by mathematics.

David Deutsch  [36:37](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=2197)
I think that's clearly untrue. If by universe, you mean, the set of all, or potentially the set of all possible mathematical entities instantiated as physical objects, as you say, most of those would not be simulatable by a Turing machine. *In-line question: No, no, no, they all would be simulatable by a Turing machine, most of them wouldn't give rise to the physical possibility of Turing machine in that part of the universe. For example, I don't think there are a lot of Turing machines in the middle of the sun.* But in the space of all mathematical objects, there are objects which solve the halting problem. And that such an object cannot be simulated by a Turing machine. There are also kind of universes where...
---
Charles Bédard  [47:36](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=2856)
Nice, thanks. David, what is your take on incompleteness? And it doesn't have to be from the algorithmic information theoretic perspective, just what are your thoughts?

David Deutsch  [47:45](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=2865)
I would agree with what Charlie just said. It's the world that Hilbert envisaged is a world without creativity. It is. And probably ultimately, if you take sort of our world and hobble it down to that level, life could never have evolved. So ours is a world in which life can evolve because there's incompleteness in the mathematics that describe our world. I said mathematics just now as a concession to you all. But what I meant is entirely a physical thing. It's a physical property of the world, which is responsible for the possibility of life and then later, presumably of intelligence and creativity. And science and of the limitlessness of science. So the illimitability of science is itself, let's put it the other way around. If science was limited, if there was a feature of the universe that limits science in the way that Hilbert wanted to limit mathematics, then there couldn't have been any science in the first place. And this is another one of those connections between emergent, what we call emergent properties and what we call microscopic properties. I would like to see a way of formulating the laws of physics that doesn't discriminate between microscopic and emergent laws of physics. A lot of the sort of notorious problems we have, like how to define entropy and the arrow of time and so on, I think are just because we insist that the microscope, the world must be fundamentally made of microscopic laws. And so just to let you all know, Constructor theory is an attempt to have a scale independent way of describing laws. I think someone's raised a hand, is that?
---
Audience Questioner  [50:21](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=3021)
Okay. So you said that if there was anything that limited science in the universe, if the universe somehow limited the scope of science, then science couldn't have gotten started in the first place. But I can imagine that the observable universe is actually all there is. Beyond the observable universe, there's no matter, there's only space. So there's nothing to help us, I don't know, form larger and larger computations. So at some point we reach the limit of what we can do with computers or something like that. And that would still be consistent with us having the ability to do science right now. I was wondering if you think it's wrong that maybe even if there's a world without, even if beyond the observable universe, there's no matter, that you can somehow still have science that progresses infinitely, or if this is another mistake, or yeah, I'm curious about the response to that.

David Deutsch  [51:23](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=3083)
Yeah, so I think that is wrong. And it's for exactly the same reason that I was just saying. If we characterize all possible laws as being like our world, but it only lasts a million years, or like our world, but it only lasts a billion years, then there are lots of possibilities where it would look like our world was the actual one. And similarly for mathematics, you could have, it might be possible for proofs to reach up to a million steps, but no more, because it's so happened that the laws of physics make all computers decay after they have performed a million steps. And there are many more of those worlds than there are what we think the actual world is with no limits. And that is because, that's an illustrate, not because, that's an illustration of the fact that, got to be, okay, I won't say it's because the limitless one is simpler, because that would be falling into the mathematician's misconception. But I want to say something like that. I want to say that the limitless one is a good explanation in high-level terms. If you try to translate that into low-level terms, you'll get to variations of it, which look like, well, it only lasts a million years, it only lasts 2 million years and so on. But at the high level, variations of it are very difficult to find, because you would have to say, okay, proof is limited by, by what? That you would have to have some high-level thing that can fit into the language of talking about proofs and limits and completeness and so on. So from the point of view of physics, these are all high-level macroscopic constructs. But I think those are the fundamental concepts in which the laws of physics actually are expressed. And because of that, we can say that insisting on describing it all microscopically is perverse because it's much less simple. But what we really mean is that there are no good explanations along that route. *In-line comment: Very good words to summarize. The way I understand what you just said is that there's other explanation, might well be that in some sense it could be that the universe ends at what is observable, that the observable universe is all there is, but that would ruin other explanations that we have, like explanations of how science works.* Yes, and if you're going to settle for that you might as well settle for the fairies at the bottom of the garden. We needn't have embarked on this great project of mathematics and physics.
---
Charles Bédard  [55:03](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=3303)
Thanks. David, would you relate the incompleteness phenomenon in mathematics with fallibilism in knowledge creation in general? It seems like you sort of invoked it when you invoked life, is that the similar idea?

David Deutsch  [55:19](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=3319)
Yes, it's again a similar idea and for the same reason. If fallibilism were not true and there were infallible ways of deriving knowledge, then when we have derived some knowledge it would never change and it would be true and the world would be finite, the world would be a representation of that finite piece of knowledge. Conversely, the real situation is that the world is infinitely amenable to knowledge creation and therefore it must be infinitely susceptible to errors, which however can be corrected. But nothing provides a firm foundation, not even, and I repeat what I said earlier, not even logic, not even the logical rules of inference. Those are all conjectures. We pick them because they seem right, because they seem useful, they seem fruitful, but who knows, we may find new ones.
---
Charles Bennett  [56:38](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=3398)
Are you saying that there could be a world in which pi was rational or square root of two, say?

David Deutsch  [56:48](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=3408)
Well, of course, that's a fairly simple case. All it would have to do is have a different geometry from ours, not Euclidean geometry. I mean, pi isn't instantiated in the universe anyway, it's an idealization. So if you actually measure a circle, you'll never get pi as the ratio between the radius and the diameter and the circumference. *In-line comment: I was thinking of the mathematical pi.* Well, so there are two different things one might mean by the mathematical pi. Physics allows us a certain window onto the class of abstractions, a tiny window. We can see some of them, we can form theories about some of them, we can learn about some of them, and they include Euclidean geometry with its pi. That pi cannot be changed by anyone, not even God, not even if we look out of a different window. But if we did look out of a different window, thanks to having different laws of physics, or if the laws of physics were not what we think they are, but are a bit different from what we think they are, as happened with Euclidean geometry and general relativity, then we won't find pi out there in the stuff we can look at. We can still describe it, we can describe pi, and we can describe the universe as it actually is, which doesn't have pi. And there will be other ones which we can't describe, we can't describe, but they may have people in them which can describe them. And then there'll be infinitely more where there aren't people who can describe anything. And be careful to conclude that therefore we don't exist, because that is like the anthropic principle misconception. Just because- *In-line comment: I would say the misapplication of the anthropic principle. These places exist, but there's nobody there to complain about it.* No, but you want to use it to deduce something about the world we do see. And I don't think the anthropic principle is powerful enough to do that, because it will only, it will, the most it can do is-
---
Charles Bennett  [1:04:53](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=3893)
How do you discover what these high-level fundamental laws, because how do you discover them or refute them?

David Deutsch  [1:04:59](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=3899)
Yeah, the same way that we discovered low-level ones, conjecture. We have a problem that we think might be solvable by postulating a law of nature, and the law of nature seems to answer that problem and many other problems, and so if it doesn't, then we haven't solved the problem yet, and the more it does, the more problems it exposes, which we then solve and so on. Now, we're doing this at many levels already. I mean, there are people who have deep theories about what it takes to win a war and what it takes to make a stable society and what it takes to cure depression and so on. It's just that we have a culture that stigmatizes those from the point of view of being fundamental. So we only expect such knowledge to extend to our own planet, our own time, our own species, if that. You know, we don't think of them as being fundamental, but some of them, like the law of the existence of universal computation, and the law of increase of entropy for that matter, they are, from a practical point of view, we do regard them as fundamental, like as Eddington or someone said, you know, somebody tells you that the first law of thermodynamics is wrong, then so much the worse for the theory, but if they say the second law is wrong, then they must retire in deep humiliation and so on. So we do actually have confidence in high level laws. It's just that we have a culture that tells us that those can't be fundamental. We can't kind of infer things about the universe and the Big Bang and the long-term survival of the universe. And bits of the universe that we can't see. This sort of consideration is, you know, it's considered ludicrous to try to talk about that from using concepts like knowledge and even computation and information and so on. Information actually is a bit of an exception because thanks to the mathematician's misconception, people are inclined to think that information is fundamental and everything might be made of bits. But yes, so...
---
Charles Bennett  [1:08:24](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=4104)
Wheeler put it the other way. He says physics is informational.

David Deutsch  [1:08:28](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=4108)
Yeah, well, that's a misconception. That obviously can't be right. The, you know, that's, it's the same thing as expecting us to be in a simulation and the aliens simulating us on a giant computer. And for some reason, people think that that computer has got to be a Turing machine. That's simply a non sequitur. It's just a parochial forcing of a human concept onto imaginary superhuman aliens. *In-line question: You mean you think it might be a machine at the higher level of the hierarchy, which could solve the halting problem and then was worrying about harder things?* Yes, although calling it higher level, that's from our point of view. *In-line comment: I mean in a Kleene hierarchy.* 
Yeah, which is again, expressed from our point of view. It could just have different fundamental states and different fundamental operations. So one of its fundamental operations might be to solve the halting problem. Not very slowly, like you're envisaging, but instantly. So you could ask it questions about Turing machines and it could answer all such questions instantly. On the other hand, adding two and two would have it scratching its head for a million years. Well, you can't deny that in the set of all mathematical objects, such things exist. And therefore it is logically possible that physics conforms to that object rather than the objects we think it conforms to.
---
David Deutsch  [1:14:56](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=4496)
Oscar Wilde said, 'we're all in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars.' Well, some of us are looking at infinity because it solves problems here and now. *In-line comment: But it seems to me like a cheat. I think you're also giving up.* We've embraced the continuum for centuries. *In-line comment: But it doesn't, but for, okay, but that's only to make our life easier. And if it were discreet instead, it wouldn't change it. It wouldn't be a radical thing to put it on a lattice.* We're not here to make our lives easier. We're here to understand the world. And that's why these continuums and derivatives and all that infinite stuff was invented, was conjectured. And it might be false, but it might not be. We shouldn't have prejudices about these things.
---
Audience Questioner  [1:17:03](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=4623)
Hi, I'm not sure whether I understood why incompleteness is fundamental for non-equilibrium phenomena and so forth. I think it was a point of David that he made before. So I'd like maybe more comments about that. Thank you.

David Deutsch  [1:17:30](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=4650)
I'm sure Charlie could do this better, but the connection is that if you have to look at the contrapositive, if there is a limitation such as Hilbert imagined, that you can write out an algorithm that will be a criterion of truth, then mathematics has stopped at that point. And the same would be true of physics. If there was a knowable law of physics that predicted everything, then that would be the end of physics. And if there were such a thing as life in a universe, which I think there couldn't be, but if there were, then it would really mean that the design of the most complicated creature that could exist, which would be finitely complicated, would exist baked into the laws of physics at the big bang. So the universe would not have any of the kinds of openness explain the complexity and all the high level structure if there were infallible truths available the other way around, unless there were fallibility. So Charlie.
---
Audience Questioner  [1:20:20](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=4820)
So, hello. Thank you so much for the great discussion. Maybe I have a question about a bit of a different topic, namely about artificial intelligence and the AGI maybe, because some of us are interested in this. So from the Turing Church thesis, we know that our brains are not doing anything magical. They could be simulated by a Turing machine. So that means in principle, we could implement something like AGI if we would know how. But it could be that the only way, at least in my view, the only way to implement this is to simulate something like a human brain on a Turing machine. Not that there's any simple AGI program that does something like human level intelligence or creativity, or maybe there is any reason we might get there. Do you think there is any reason that we should expect a simple program that implements AGI or do we have to take the detour to simulate something like a human brain and this then?

David Deutsch  [1:21:32](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=4892)
Well, the human brain might be simple looked at the right way. I think simple doesn't necessarily mean easy to find. I think there is a very strong reason to believe that the explanatory universality property of the human brain, which at present only humans have, must be encoded in a very short amount of DNA. A tiny amount. People have different numbers for this, but we seem to be 95% or 99% of our DNA is the same as chimpanzees. And of the rest, a lot is junk DNA. And of the rest, a lot is differences between us and chimpanzees that aren't connected with these deep epistemological things. So maybe it's only a few K of code in DNA terms that encodes the AGI-ness or the GI-ness of the brain. But that doesn't mean it's easy to find. I would guess that it is a short program. I mean, you know, few K of program is actually long if you want to write it, but it's relatively short compared with the kinds of things that happen in biology. And I think it'll be very hard to find. And probably, well, I would expect us to find it only once we have understood a philosophical theory of what the function is, what the creativity, consciousness, qualia, and so on, what those things are in some precise terms. Precise, but high level, I would expect. And then we can probably quite easily write a program that has that property. Then we'll be in various kinds of trouble, but not any of the kinds of trouble that people are thinking about now.
---
Charles Bennett  [1:26:12](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=5172)
Yeah, yeah. In other words, another way of doing it would be giving us a transplant of bonobo genes or something that just makes us more susceptible to taking it easy and less susceptible to getting angry at our neighbors because of misinformation we've heard about them and going out and killing them, killing them, which seems to be the tendency people have, which probably was very adaptive at one stage, but it's not helping us right now.

David Deutsch  [1:26:47](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=5207)
Thanks. You don't believe that in the better angels of our nature and Steven Pinker and all that stuff, he says we've been getting better and better. And look, if civilization... *In-line comment: There's, that's tendency, but there are also strong tendencies in the other direction. We saw in the 20th century, it got pretty bad and it could do so again. And it's worse now because the reach of things is even more global than it was in the 20th century. So a very repressive world government would be harder to dislodge.* There's a more fundamental reason why you're right, namely because of fallibilism. There can be no upper bound to the size of error we can make. So although we have the potential to go exponentially into the future ad infinitum, we have the potential to make arbitrarily large errors. We may have a dark age and another dark age and a dark age lasting a million years, or we might wipe ourselves out and something else might evolve somewhere else in the universe or somewhere else in the multiverse. There can be no guarantee that that won't happen. There can be no guarantee that it probably won't happen. So what we have to do is solve problems as we find them and create knowledge as we can and not rely on supernatural guarantees. I thought you'd like that point about the finite bound. Yeah.
---
Audience Questioner  [1:28:58](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=5338)
Hi. So I had a question because a lot of this discussion we spent discussing about how undecidability and the halting problem are, I guess, flip sides of the same problem. Would you also say that... Universality. Sorry. Yeah. Universality and the halting problem are the kind of opposite sides of the same problem. Would you also say that these are opposite sides of induction and deduction as ways to kind of acquire knowledge? Because we talked about, I guess, Solomonov induction a little bit in the beginning and how maybe that is one conceptualization of how you could derive knowledge from instead of using deduction from a formal set of axioms where you would use data instead. So would you say that the incomputability of something like ideal induction is the same as not being able to deduce because of incompleteness?

David Deutsch  [1:29:57](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=5397)
Yes. Yes. They are both impossible for the same reason and their impossibility is a very good thing for the same reason. So in both cases, instead of deriving things, we have to guess things. We have to conjecture and the conjectures are always fallible. And I'm spouting Popper's philosophy here. So that's where you have to go for this. And he got an amazing number of things right working almost in isolation.
---
Charles Bédard  [1:30:34](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=5434)
But to link, to relate to Aditya's point, I think also Solomonov's induction is an idealization and to have Solomonov's metric, one needs to solve the halting problem. But in concrete applications, one cannot find Solomonov's prior. And so what we do, we can, as you know, upper semi-computed perhaps, and then come up with guesses. Oh, maybe this phenomenon from which I got these data has been explained by this program. Now everything is programs, but one can come up with this. Actually, that's also a problem, how we link scientific explanations with programs. But I think there is a bit of a Popperian flavor in Solomonov induction once we realize that it's uncomputable. So forget it. It's a beautiful idea. It does converge to whatever it needs to converge. But the fact that it's uncomputable, we can only guess programs.

David Deutsch  [1:31:32](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=5492)
And the thing is usually, or often, shall I say, often the problem we're trying to solve isn't in data. We haven't yet got any data. Sometimes it's a theoretical problem. Like how is it possible for Maxwell's equations to be true and geometry to be what we think it is? There's no data, no data at all. So you have the problem first, then the theory, then the data. And so induction of any kind simply can't exist in that kind of a reality. And as I keep saying, it's a very good thing that it can't. So Solomonov is solving, trying to solve a problem that isn't there. It's trying to say, you know, how can we make this induction or this Bayesian inference or whatever makes sense? How can we get the priors right? Well, the priors aren't right. Get over it.
---
Sophie  [1:35:16](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=5716)
I would have a quick question. Go ahead, Sophie. Yes. I'm wondering when you're talking about other universes that would have maybe, they could solve the halting problem and for them, it's pretty easy, but for us, it's difficult and vice versa for other tasks. Are you thinking about other branches in the multiverse or something that would be completely outside of what we are studying now?

David Deutsch  [1:35:49](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=5749)
The latter. In the multiverse, there's no, all the universes in the quantum multiverse have the same tame mathematics. They even have the same computable functions. They just have different complexity theory, but complexity theory isn't that important anyway. So, yeah, but, but we have to, we have to consider universes with different laws, if only to, to examine explanations like the anthropic principle, which purport to explain things in our universe and only, only certain very special kinds of anthropic argument constitute arguments. They, otherwise they simply fall victim to this Boltzmann brain or boundary of the, of the set of possibilities problem. Dennis Sharma, when he was, when he told us about this objection, he said, that what we should really look for, anthropically, is for, is a case, not, not a case where a slight change in a fundamental law would have meant that we're not here, but where the, but where we are located at the center of the region, let's say, the fine structure constant, rather than saying, you know, if it was one percent different, we wouldn't be here. Look at the region where we would be here and, and try to find out whether we're near the center. If we're near the center, that, that is a real anthropic problem. That, you know, if you tell this to religious people, they're going to say it's God. And it's very hard to argue them out of it. But I don't think we will be in the center. *In-line comment: But I think you don't think we're also on the edges, because if we're on the edges, we're out of it right after.* Yeah, we're neither at the center of the edges, because that's not where the explanation lies. The explanation of the actual values doesn't, doesn't lie in our existence. It's a common cause. Our existence is caused by things like the law of the universality of computation. *In-line question: We're not at the middle and we're not at the edge. Exactly how far from the edge are we?* Probably a non-computable amount or an intractably computable amount.
---
Speaker 3  [1:38:51](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=5931)
David, I'm just curious, this is a small question, but I'm just curious. So your comments about the sort of unpredictability of the future of our civilization and the possibility of our demise, is that the same thing as this edge that we've been talking about? Or do you see a difference?

David Deutsch  [1:39:13](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=5953)
Yeah, it's almost the opposite. It's to do with our fallibility, which is to do with our capacity for infinite growth. *In-line question: Good, that's interesting. So it's our hope as well as our possible demise?* Well, I'm not expecting our possible demise. I think arguing that there will be a demise is itself not legitimate. That's a prophecy. That's a prophecy. That's a prediction. *In-line question: But it's in the scope. You're saying we can't be sure to avoid it.* The future of knowledge is unknowable. Again, we've got to get over that. It's a fact.
---
Sophie  [1:40:57](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6057)
I would have another question maybe for Charles. I wonder what's your view of probabilities?

Charles Bennett  [1:41:07](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6067)
My view of probability? Yep. I think it's just, I think it arises from entanglement.

David Deutsch  [1:41:27](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6087)
Yes agreed.
---
Sophie  [1:41:45](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6105)
Cool. My question would also, could also be formulated as, do you agree with David in terms of what are probabilities? And I guess the answer is yes.

Charles Bédard  [1:41:55](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6115)
Not necessarily, because many people view probabilities as entanglement, because they understand quantum theory as unitary. And so entanglement is out there. But even, even among these people, there's still many disagreements about how we should read the Born rule. And so, so, so maybe the follow-up question for Charlie, without, without being so specific as does it equate to David's, despite you embrace unitary quantum theory still, how do you view the Born rule? Is it a decision?

Charles Bennett  [1:42:27](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6147)
Oh yeah, it's hard. I try not to think about it, but I know how to. David, do you have an answer on that?

David Deutsch  [1:42:45](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6165)
Yes, I think, I think the decision theory approach to probability in quantum mechanics is correct and sufficient. And whether you, whether you call that deriving the Born rule, I don't know. I think the Born rule is a, is not a universal rule, obviously, because it doesn't apply to quantum theory at, I mean, it only applies to quantum theory at a tiny minority of, of, in a tiny minority of situations. In those situations, modeling the, the situation with decision theory, the decision theory, theoretical approach, if I can say very quickly, is to take decision, classical decision theory and quantum theory, and then apply them to the, to the, to the decision theory. Strip out all the probability from classical decision theory. So strip out all the probabilistic axioms and so on. And then quantum theory, strip out the probabilistic, you know, if you're going to have wave function collapse or something, strip out all that stuff, anything that's supposed to be probabilistic. Then smush them together and you get consistent quantum theory, namely Everett's, and you get a consistent theory of probability, which only applies when people are making decisions. And the, the rule that they use, assuming that they make measurements accurately and all that stuff in that approximation, their rational behavior as determined by decision theory is the same as it would be if they believed in stochastic processes, even though stochastic processes do not happen in nature.
---
Audience Questioner  [1:44:46](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6286)
Cool. I'm not sure I properly understood your explanation, David, because if you say you want to get rid of the Born rule and you believe in a unitary quantum mechanics and, and Everett's many worlds interpretation, how do you reconcile the fact that when we do a quantum experiment in the lab, we, you know, we just get to see one result. How do we, how do we interpret the fact that we're in just a specific branch of the multiverse and say not another one?

David Deutsch  [1:45:20](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6320)
We're not, we're in all of them. And the fact that we see only one outcome is a prediction of quantum theory. If you, if you just write the equation for, with the variable for how many outcomes do we see, then you will find that the world after a good measurement, the world will be in an eigenstate of that with eigenvalue one. What actually happens is that all of the outcomes happen. I mean, generically, but the, the, the question was about probability. What do we then mean that some of them have a high prior probability than others, given that they all happen, then you have to bring in another part of the model, which is suppose we were betting on these outcomes, how would it be rational to bet and decision theory without probabilistic axioms and quantum theory without them together, give the answer. It's magic. I'm not surprised you're shaking your head, but if you read the papers, it's, it's, I think it's unanswerable. I mean, it's undeniable.
---
Charles Bennett  [1:46:54](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6414)
So David has amidst his other euphemisms and dysphemisms brought in what is, I regard the, the, the most widespread obfuscatory euphemism, God, that is people, people use it to mean their own idea of God, which they're going to try to get you to like and believe in, but they haven't actually said what it is yet. So I'm going to use that also, but in a physicist's way. So if you imagine a conversation with God and, and first of all, you say, what time is it? And God says, well you would say it's about 1037 Eastern daylight time. But for me, it's all times I'm eternal. And then you'll say, well, you're supposed to be omniscient. Will it rain a year from now? And God says, well, that's like, yes and no. And you'll say, well, will it rain for me from now? Well, I say, it's like saying what I see is, is something that looks like your hand and you're sitting here and you're saying, which of my fingers is the correct extension of my wrist? They all are. When it gets to be next year, you'll either be on one where it's raining, which is the one that has my wedding ring, or you'll be one of the other ones where it isn't raining. And I can see all of them, but, but, and, and you, for you now, they're all equally real. And then in a, next year, you will have a kind of a, a, a truncated perspective in which you think one of them is real and the others aren't, but they all still are.

David Deutsch  [1:49:07](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6547)
I'm not going to think that. I know that the other branches exist even if I can't see them. Most things in the universe I can't see. I don't know why that's so.
---
Charles Bennett  [1:49:21](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6561)
So this is like this. What Galileo said, he says, I don't know if he actually said this, but he says that it's a yes, I say that the earth moves and if it moves the way I say it is you shouldn't be able to feel it moving so shut up.

David Deutsch  [1:49:40](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6580)
Everett said that to DeWitt. *In-line questionL And is that the moment where DeWitt started to say, okay I don't know what more to argue against?* Yeah that's the moment he was convinced.
---
Audience Questioner  [1:50:48](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6648)
Hey do you hear me? Yeah. So would you say or any of you say that in that sense in the sense we just discussed now the Born principle would be a statement about consciousness of what do you experience or do you think it's beyond like consciousness would be beyond the scope of the statement?

David Deutsch  [1:51:07](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6667)
It has nothing to do with it. It's I mean obviously if consciousness is to be described as a physical process which it must be then it presumably obeys quantum theory and so on but it has nothing to do with these issues of measurement and probability and and anything like that. It's just a physical thing. There's no more reason to assume it has a special place in physics than it would be to assume that squirrels have a special place in physics. Obviously they're described by physics but they don't have any relevance to fundamental discussions of physics.
---
Various  [1:51:54](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6714)
I asked before because the idea was like I mean the fundamental the funda if I'm following the discussion is that like you have these different potential outcomes of measurement all of them occur all of them have their own branches and all of them are there but the statement is more like the one you will experience one of them but and then it's if it's about you will experience one of them you will see one of them is wouldn't it be addressing directly the consciousness of or maybe I'm just like going out of it?

David Deutsch  [1:52:22](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CluVy2jICgs&t=6742)
It's the same question can be asked about a seed of a plant that grows into two trees the left one and the right one and you ask the seed are you going to be the left one or the right one or twins you know are you going to be Joe or Fred you ask the fertilized egg and it says to you well in a sense I'm going to be both of them in a sense I'm only going to be one of them you know that is to say I will not experience being both of them but the experience of being each of them will both happen.