## metadata
last updated: 01-02-2023 by Randy after Emilia - review scan incl Proper names and begin/end errors
link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY


## content

David Deutsch [0:41](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=41) SKIPQA
When I was a child, I remember being told that in the distant past, a very learned person might hope to understand everything that was understood. Whereas now because of specialization, because so much is known, that's impossible that one person can only understand a very small fraction of what's known. And I really didn't believe this, I didn't want to believe this. And I envied the ancient scholars who might have aspired to knowing everything that was known at the time. And what I meant by knowing everything that was known for understanding everything that was understood, is not that they knew in detail everything that happened, that they had lists of things which they remembered. But that's very far from what I meant. I meant that they understood all the explanations that were known. And I believe that we are not heading away from an era in which one might understand all the explanations as they're known, but towards it, because we are continually unifying and broadening and deepening our explanations of the world. The universe that we see around us is real. But it's only one small facet of reality. The whole of reality consists of many such universes, and they're all equally real. And we call the whole set the multiverse.
Like, oh my gosh, that sounds totally rad! I mean, the idea of like, knowing everything that was understood back in the day sounds so cool, right? I wish I could be like one of those ancient scholars who just knew it all. But like, now we have so much knowledge and stuff, it's like impossible for one person to know everything. But hold up, this guy David Deutsch is like saying we're actually heading towards a time where we can understand all the explanations known to humankind. That's so mind-blowing! And like, the whole multiverse concept he's talking about - that's next level trippy! Whoa, I'm totally into this whole "unifying and deepening explanations" vibe he's sharing. Groovy, man!

David Deutsch [4:12](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=252)
The multiverse theory comes about as an explanation of the predictions of our best theory of physics, which is quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics makes very accurate predictions, the most accurate predictions that any theory of physics has ever made. But if you want to explain why these predictions are so, how these physical events come about, there's no alternative but to postulate that what we see around us is not the whole of reality, that reality is much more varied and has a great multiplicity. This is what we call multiple universes.
Like, oh my god, that is totally so next level! I mean, quantum mechanics, like, blows my mind with its accuracy and stuff. It's, like, totally making me think, what if, you know, this reality is just, like, one of many out there? The whole multiverse theory is, like, seriously, just mind-blowing, you know? Reality being, like, way more varied and, like, having multiple universes? Crazy!

Unknown [4:49](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=289)
But why would we need multiple universes?
Oh my god, like multiple universes? That is so totally gnarly! Like, maybe they're for all the different versions of us out there, you know? Like, if one me is a famous actress in one universe, then I wanna be friends with her! Whoa, mind blown!

David Deutsch [4:53](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=293)
Suppose you take one of the classic experiments of quantum mechanics, for instance, the prediction of the interference of light. Now, I can show you interference on a simple laser, which we can. What is it that forces us to believe in parallel universes? I'll show you the experiment. This is an experiment, a very old one, that's been, was first done hundreds of years ago, long before quantum theory was even thought of. It involves shining light through holes. This is just a piece of cardboard with little pinprick holes in it. And there's one of them, just a single hole.
Oh my gosh, like totally far out dude! So, like, they're talking about this, like, experiment with light and holes and stuff and how it's all connected to, like, parallel universes? That is so rad, I need to see this laser interference experiment pronto! It's like, science is, like, totally blowing my mind right now. Quantum mechanics is, like, way trippy, am I right?
