## metadata
last updated: 02-08-2024 Brandon
link: N/A
link2: N/A
transcript source: N/A
length: N/A

## content

### transcript

Quotation1 DirectOtherVoice  [1:24:55](https://open.spotify.com/episode/0EET91eUZO1GS4xi1TRMec?si=Erzr3WV9SkCoau_DxKdkyQ&t=41)
Right, right. And also, I believe, also law. And I should say that she has now gone on to serve on the president's council for bioethics. So she's one of 13 people advising President Obama on all of the ethical implications of advances in medicine. The rot has spread very far. So this is the conversation I had with her after my talk. She said, well, how could you possibly say that forcing women and girls to live under the veil is wrong? That's just your... I understand you don't like it, but that's just your Western notion of right and wrong.

Quotation2 DirectOwnPastVoice  [1:24:55](https://open.spotify.com/episode/0EET91eUZO1GS4xi1TRMec?si=Erzr3WV9SkCoau_DxKdkyQ&t=41)
I said, well, 'The moment you admit that questions of right and wrong and good and evil relate to the well-being of conscious creatures, and in this case, human beings, then you have to admit that we know something about human well-being. And we know that this isn't... that the burka isn't the perfect solution to the mystery of how to maximize human well-being.' 

Quotation3 DirectOtherAndOwnPastVoices  [1:24:55](https://open.spotify.com/episode/0EET91eUZO1GS4xi1TRMec?si=Erzr3WV9SkCoau_DxKdkyQ&t=41)
Right, right. And also, I believe, also law. And I should say that she has now gone on to serve on the president's council for bioethics. So she's one of 13 people advising President Obama on all of the ethical implications of advances in medicine. The rot has spread very far. So this is the conversation I had with her after my talk. She said, well, 'how could you possibly say that forcing women and girls to live under the veil is wrong? That's just your... I understand you don't like it, but that's just your Western notion of right and wrong.' I said, well, 'The moment you admit that questions of right and wrong and good and evil relate to the well-being of conscious creatures, and in this case, human beings, then you have to admit that we know something about human well-being. And we know that this isn't... that the burka isn't the perfect solution to the mystery of how to maximize human well-being.' And she said, 'Well, that's just your point of view.' And I said, 'Well, let's just make it simpler. Let's say we found a culture living on an island somewhere that was removing the eyeballs of every third child based on some belief system. Would you then agree that we had found a culture that was not perfectly maximizing human well-being?' And she said, 'Well, it would depend on why they were doing it.' And I said, 'Well, okay, let's say they're doing it for religious reasons. Let's say they have a scripture which says every third should walk in darkness or some such nonsense.' Then she said, 'Well, then you could never say that they were wrong.' The fact that this was a religious precept trumped all other possible truth claims, leaving us with no place to stand from which to say anything is ever better or worse in the course of human events. And again, I've had the same kinds of conversations with physicists who will say that, you know, I don't like slavery. I personally wouldn't want to keep slaves. But there's no place to say scientifically that slaveholders are wrong. And yet this is tantamount to saying that not only, I mean, once you acknowledge the link between morality and human well-being or the well-being of all possible conscious persons or entities, this is tantamount to saying that not only do we not know anything at all about human well-being, we will never know anything about it. There is no conceivable breakthrough in knowledge that will tell us anything at all relevant to navigating the difference between the worst possible misery for everyone and every other state of the universe that is better than that. And this is an amazingly influential point of view. And so many of the things you said about progress and about there only being a subset of humanity that has found creative mechanisms by which to improve human life reliably, that is an incredibly controversial and even bigoted statement to the ears of many people in positions to make decisions about how we all should live. And so that's what I find myself most worried about at this moment.

Quotation4 InternalMonologue  [1:24:55](https://open.spotify.com/episode/0EET91eUZO1GS4xi1TRMec?si=Erzr3WV9SkCoau_DxKdkyQ&t=41)
And similarly, if you're only told that your physical system corresponds to some program of the quantum computer, and you haven't said which, then you haven't specified the whole of physics. So then I thought, well, what we need is a generalization of the quantum theory of computation that does say that, that assigns to each program the corresponding real object. Now that was an early conception of the quantum theory, sorry, of Constructor Theory, making it directly a generalization of the theory of computation. But then I realized, and I had already realized this at the time, that that's not the way to go because that still tries to cast Constructor Theory within the same mold as all existing theories.

