## metadata

last updated: 01-02-2023 by Randy after Emilia - review scan incl Proper names and begin/end errors
link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY

## content

### transcript

David Deutsch [2:25](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=145)
I studied physics at Cambridge and then and after that, I was always on the borderline between different subjects, I studied quantum field theory in an astrophysics department, and then I studied, I came to the multi universe theory in the relativity center in the University of Texas, at Austin. And then I was in the Mathematical Institute in Oxford. All my research has always been on the borderline between two subjects. I suppose the reason for that is that I'm interested in unifications and in broadening and deepening understanding of things. Well, this is my office. I've never actually been here before. Why not? Because I work at home, so I've never used my office.
---
David Deutsch [4:12](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=252)
The multiverse theory comes about as an explanation of the predictions of our best theory of physics, which is quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics makes very accurate predictions, the most accurate predictions that any theory of physics has ever made. But if you want to explain why these predictions are so, how these physical events come about, there's no alternative but to postulate that what we see around us is not the whole of reality, that reality is much more varied and has a great multiplicity. This is what we call multiple universes.
---
Unknown [4:49](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=289)
But why would we need multiple universes?

David Deutsch [4:53](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=293)
Suppose you take one of the classic experiments of quantum mechanics, for instance, the prediction of the interference of light. Now, I can show you interference on a simple laser, which we can. What is it that forces us to believe in parallel universes? I'll show you the experiment. This is an experiment, a very old one, that's been, was first done hundreds of years ago, long before quantum theory was even thought of. It involves shining light through holes. This is just a piece of cardboard with little pinprick holes in it. And there's one of them, just a single hole. This is a laser pointer that we use in giving lectures. I shine the laser through the hole, and we can see a little spot on the screen over there. What would you expect to see? You'd expect to see, if there's one hole, you'd expect to see one spot, but that's already not true. You see quite a complicated pattern. It's called an interference pattern. I'll tell you why. Suppose we... What would happen if we made a second hole? Here's another place on the screen where there are two holes. We get a completely different pattern. And through three holes, there's a different pattern again. That's the pattern we get from four holes. This experiment has been known for many decades before quantum theory was even thought of. But the key to quantum theory is what happens when we perform this experiment with very dim light. Suppose we take the laser and we put in front of it a dark filter, a very dark filter, so that very few photons actually get through, maybe only one per second. And then we can't see that anymore, but we have instruments that can see it. So we put the instruments where we know the light beam is, and when the detector is in a place where photons are arriving, it will start clicking. It'll go click, click, click. If we move it over slightly to a dark place in the pattern, it'll stop clicking. So that replaces our eyes. Now, the surprise is that even with this one photon at a time coming through the holes, the pattern is exactly the same as it was when we were shining the bright laser light through. Well, the question is, how do we explain the fact that we see the same pattern, that we detect the same pattern on the screen when there's only one photon at a time going through here, as we did when the bright laser light was shining on it? You see, this one photon, the one we detect, must have gone through one of those two holes, but the place where it lands on the screen depends on whether there is one hole, two holes, or indeed three holes, however many holes there are. Each number of holes makes a completely different pattern on the screen. So even when there's only one photon at a time coming through, the place where it lands depends on what other holes there are. And what we must conclude from this is that something is coming through those other holes and shoving our photon aside, and that process is interference. What is this something? Well, we can do further experiments to find out what that something is. The conclusion that we draw is that this thing behaves like light in every way we can detect experimentally except one, and that is we can't detect it. So it's not there. It is there because it pushes aside the light that we can see, and it behaves like light, and the only reasonable conclusion is that it is light of an invisible kind. Now, that doesn't take you all the way to concluding that there are many universes, but the thing is, quantum theory predicts all this, and in the equations of quantum theory, these invisible bits of light appear in the equations, and they are treated in exactly the same way as the light that we do see. What's more, all particles behave like this, not just light, but even the particles in the screen, the particles that you and I are made of. They all are affected, shoved aside, by counterparts of themselves that behave exactly like those particles but cannot be seen. So they are somewhere else? They are real matter, real energy, real light that we cannot see, and so they are an entire parallel world of matter, energy, and light. That's why we call it a parallel universe, and there are many of them. In this experiment, we can see however many holes we make, there is a different pattern. Even when one photon is going through, there is a different pattern for six holes, for seven holes, for a hundred holes, for a thousand holes, and that means that there must be something traveling through every one of those thousand holes and making a difference to the photon that we see.
---
Unknown [10:49](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=649)
Making thousands of parallel universes?

David Deutsch [10:51](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=651)
And that means there must be at least thousands of parallel universes. In fact, the theory tells us there are a lot more than that. At the time of the Big Bang, according to quantum mechanics, all the universes came into existence, but they were all very alike. And then with the interactions between them, interference and other interactions, caused them to become different. Are they real? All the other universes are as real as the one you and I are in now.
---
Speaker 2 [11:44](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=704)
Suppose you are right. Suppose we have a lot of different and a lot of the same universes all existing together. What would it mean for me? I mean, am I a part of many universes?

David Deutsch [12:01](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=721)
You have to start thinking of yourself not as an entity existing in one universe, but an entity existing in the multiverse as a whole. And so there are other copies of you and of me in other universes. Some of them, some of these copies, are completely identical to us. Now, in those cases, it's really just a matter of words to say whether they are other universes or whether they're the same universe, if they're completely identical. There are other universes which are very like this one, but differ only in the position of one atom somewhere. Now, those universes are interfering with ours, and they are producing interference effects, which we could detect in the laboratory if we wanted to. And there are others which are very different, where the interference is so small that we will never see them, but they form part of the explanation of the things that we do see. So, you exist in multiple copies, I exist in multiple copies, and there are some universes in which I'm sitting here talking to you about something slightly different, and there are other universes where I've just got up and gone to have a cup of tea.
---
Speaker 2 [13:17](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=797)
What makes me go into multiple copies in multiple universes?

David Deutsch [13:22](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SDZ454K_lBY&t=802)
You already exist in multiple copies. Initially, they are all identical. And then, when a moment of choice happens, both a microscopic one and one made by you consciously, these identical copies become different from one another.
