
## content

### transcript

David Lazarus [16:36](NO LINK&t=996)
And in the multiverse I assume there’s a conversation just like this going on in which I am actually showing my deep fluency in quantum mechanics right now. There is. Fantastic. I knew I could do that somewhere. David Deutsch is the author of The Beginning of Infinity, Explanations That Transform the World. He’s also the author of The Fabric of Reality. Mr. Deutsch, thank you so much for joining us. Well, thank you. It’s been fun. And if you have any theories of your own or explanations about how things are the way they are, please share them with us online at kpcc.org, click on through to the AirTalk page. We will segue in just a moment from quantum mechanics to, well, television. There you go. A natural segue as we’re joined by Mary McNamara of the LA Times to give us a recap of what happened at the Emmys. I’m David Lazarus in for Larry Mantle. This is AirTalk on 89.3 KPCC. Let’s head straight into the newsroom now and check in with everybody.

Charles Lee  [21:28](https://youtu.be/2-8Hw0Myerw&t=1288)
All right. So to play the game, big rocket Tron 5000. Ilay the game, the Grokatron 5000. It is our supercomputer formerly known as Deep Blue. And today, the Grokatron 5000 has chosen the topic, Do They Have a Good Explanation for the World? So, for the following five individuals, the Grokatron 5000 would like to know if they hold a good explanation for the world or not and maybe a little reason why. Professor Deutsch, ready to play the game? Certainly. Okay, here we go. Question number one, does he have a good explanation? It’s Variety Show host Simon Cowell.

Charles Bennett  [21:29](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Isbc4VH61Us&t=1289)
Well, I’m going to ask David about something that I think he thinks. Would you describe yourself as a technological optimist? Yes. Okay. Well, I used to be a technological optimist, but I then started studying a little bit of cosmology and maybe thinking too hard about the Copernican principle, and it occurred to me that perhaps the universe is infinite, but the self-destructive tendencies of the civilization that we’re in, our particular bubble, suggests that it may not last more than a few thousand years. And that’s okay because there are infinitely many other bubbles where they do better. We’re just not in the good one. But I think you think maybe one of those bubbles will get it right well enough so that it can spread its beneficent influence throughout everywhere, whatever that means. What’s your reaction to that question?